PEP: 5
Title: Guidelines for Language Evolution
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: paul@prescod.net (Paul Prescod)
Status: Active
Type: Process
Created: 26-Oct-2000
Post-History:

Abstract

    In the natural evolution of programming languages it is sometimes
    necessary to make changes that modify the behavior of older
    programs.  This PEP proposes a policy for implementing these
    changes in a manner respectful of the installed base of Python
    users.


Implementation Details

    Implementation of this PEP requires the addition of a formal
    warning and deprecation facility that will be described in another
    proposal.


Scope

    These guidelines apply to future versions of Python that introduce
    backward-incompatible behavior.  Backward incompatible behavior is
    a major deviation in Python interpretation from an earlier
    behavior described in the standard Python documentation.  Removal
    of a feature also constitutes a change of behavior.

    This PEP does not replace or preclude other compatibility
    strategies such as dynamic loading of backwards-compatible
    parsers.  On the other hand, if execution of "old code" requires a
    special switch or pragma then that is indeed a change of behavior
    from the point of view of the user and that change should be
    implemented according to these guidelines.

    In general, common sense must prevail in the implementation of
    these guidelines.  For instance changing "sys.copyright" does not
    constitute a backwards-incompatible change of behavior!


Steps For Introducing Backwards-Incompatible Features

    1. Propose backwards-incompatible behavior in a PEP.  The PEP must
       include a section on backwards compatibility that describes in
       detail a plan to complete the remainder of these steps.

    2. Once the PEP is accepted as a productive direction, implement
       an alternate way to accomplish the task previously provided by
       the feature that is being removed or changed.  For instance if
       the addition operator were scheduled for removal, a new version
       of Python could implement an "add()" built-in function.

    3. Formally deprecate the obsolete construct in the Python
       documentation.

    4. Add an optional warning mode to the parser that will inform
       users when the deprecated construct is used.  In other words,
       all programs that will behave differently in the future must
       trigger warnings in this mode.  Compile-time warnings are
       preferable to runtime warnings.  The warning messages should
       steer people from the deprecated construct to the alternative
       construct.

    5. There must be at least a one-year transition period between the
       release of the transitional version of Python and the release
       of the backwards incompatible version.  Users will have at
       least a year to test their programs and migrate them from use
       of the deprecated construct to the alternative one.


Local Variables: 
mode: indented-text 
indent-tabs-mode: nil 
End:
